What is JDBC?
It is a database agnostic API,
that is used to interact with a relational database.
Let's break that definition down.
JDBC is an API.
The Java platform only defines
the contracts that allow an application to interact with the database.
Database vendors like MySQL Postgres,
provide the implementation of the contract.
These implementations are called JDBC drivers.
You as an application developer,
never have to write a driver or use it directly.
A JDBC driver can be built using various approaches.
A detailed investigation of all of them is not relevant to this course.
Please use the links in the additional resources section to read more about JDBC drivers.
Let's look at the other term in the definition.
Database agnostic, which means the contracts don't change for each database.
What that translates to is,
the code that you use to connect to MySQL can be
used as is to connect to another database like postgres.
This is the key reason for JDBC's existence.
Without JDBC, it'll be very hard
for an application to change its database if it needed to.
JDBC has three main functions.
First, it allows the application to connect to a database.
Second, using that connection,
an application can send SQL statements to the database,
and finally, it lets the application process the results of those statements.
JDBC essentially acts as a bridge between the application and the database.
The application uses the JDBC provided contracts.
JDBC selects the appropriate driver,
and the driver implements the protocol that the database server understands.
While working with JDBC,
even though it has many interfaces and classes,
you will mostly be working with a few of them.
Let's see the basic building blocks that all applications need to use.
First, DriverManager.
DriverManager is responsible for selecting
the appropriate driver and connecting to the database.
It returns a connection object.
A Connection. A Connection represents the applications connection to
the database and allows the applications to send SQL statements to it.
Statement, used for executing a SQL statement and return it's results.
ResultSet, represents a set of results from the database,
usually acquired by executing a statement.